.\"ident	"@(#)r4xtetris:xtetris.man	1.2"

.TH "XTETRIS" 1 "12 July 1990"
.SH NAME
xtetris \- X Window block dropping game
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xtetris
[
.B "X options"
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Xtetris
is a game involving dropping blocks. As they drop you can move them to
the left or to the right by clicking the left or right mouse buttons
respectively. Pressing the shift key while clicking the button causes
the falling shape to rotate anti-clockwise (left mouse button) or
clockwise (right mouse button). Pressing the middle mouse button causes
the shape to quickly drop. Note that the mouse must be in the window in
which the shapes are dropping for these actions to work correctly.
.PP
You can also use the keyboard: h for moving to the left, l for moving to 
the right, j to rotate clockwise, k to rotate counter-clockwise and space 
for dropping quickly..
.PP
You can also use the direction pad, if your keyboard has one: (Left) to
move left, (Down) to rotate clockwise, (Up) to rotate counter clockwise,
and (Right) to move right.
.PP
Points are scored for each block that comes to rest on the gradually
building up pile of blocks. Different blocks in different orientations
have different point values. When the pile reaches the top of the
screen and no further blocks can be dropped the game ends. When a
row of blocks across the screen is completely filled, that
row is removed and all the blocks above it drop down.
As more rows are deleted the blocks drop faster.
.PP
A high score table is kept which is retained between separate executions
of the game.  You can avoid recording your score, by using the
.I -noscore
option.
.PP
.I Xtetris
requires the installation of an application defaults file, probably in the
file 
.I /usr/lib/X11/app-defaults/Xtetris.
If that file does not exist, 
.I xtetris
cannot run.  (It will probably print out something like "Width zero.
Terminating.")  Almost everything about
.I xtetris
can be configured in your .X11defaults file.  You can use the application
defaults file as a guide.
.SH OPTIONS
.I Xtetris
takes standard
.I X
options (see 
.I X(1)).
It adds the following:
.IP -noscore
This runs 
.I xtetris
without recording your score, or showing you the score file when you
have finished the game.
.IP "-speed value"
This sets the game's speed.  By default the speed is 10.  20 causes
the game to be 2 times faster, 5 makes it 2 times slower.  "-speed 50"
makes for an extremely fast game, however you will need the equivalent
of a IBM RS-6000 (a must-have, at 27+ VAX MIPS in its slowest model)
in order to have the screen updated rapidly.  Keep in mind that as you
knock out rows, the game's speed increases.  
.SH "WIDGET HIERARCHY"
The resource tree is as shown below. The resources of  each widget can be set
in the client's application default file for customization. 
.nf

Xtetris  xtetris
	Form  Frame
		Label  TitleBar
		Form  Status
			Label  Score
			Label  Level
			Label  Rows
			Label  Game
		Form  Buttons
			Command  Start
			Command  Pause
			Command  NewGame
			Command  Quit
			Command  Scores
		Simple  Canvas
		Simple  Shadow
		Label  NextObjectLabel
		Simple  NextObject
	TransientShell  Score_frame
		Box  Score_panel
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Label  Score_item
			Command  Done
.fi
.SH FILES
.IP /usr/games/lib/tetris_scores
Top 10 high scores.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.IP TETRIS
If set, your desired name for the high score table.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BI X (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Dan Greening wrote most of xtetris 2.0-2.3, based on
earlier work by Didier Tallot, Phill Everson, Martyn Shortley, and Adam
Marguilies.
