.\"ident	"@(#)xwud:xwud.man	1.1"

.\" xwud.man (Troff source file)
.\"	Acc: 574010317 Thu Mar 10 10:18:37 1988
.\"	Mod: 573096015 Sun Feb 28 20:20:15 1988
.\"	Sta: 573774703 Mon Mar  7 16:51:43 1988
.\"	Owner: 2011
.\"	Group: 1985
.\"	Permissions: 444


.\"	START USER STAMP AREA


.\"	END USER STAMP AREA

.TH XWUD 1 "1 March 1988" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xwud - image displayer for X
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "xwud"
[-debug] [-help] [-inverse] [-in \fIfile\fP]
[-display \fIdisplay\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Xwud
is an X Window System window image undumping utility.
.I Xwud
allows X users to display window images that were saved in a specially
formatted dump file.  The window  image  will  appear  at  the
coordinates of the original window from which the dump was taken.
This is a crude version of a more advanced utility that has never
been written.  Monochrome
dump files are displayed on a color monitor in the default foreground and
background colors. 
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.TP 8
.B "-help"
Print out a short description of the allowable options.
.PP
.TP 8
.B "-in \fIfile\fP"
This option allows the user to explicitly specify the input 
file on the command line.  The default is to take input from standard in.
.PP
.TP 8
.B -inverse
Applies to monochrome window dump files only. If selected, the window is
undumped in reverse video. This is mainly needed because the display
is `write white', whereas dump files intended eventually to be written
to a printer are generally `write black'.
.PP
.TP 8
.B "-display \fIdisplay\fP"
This  option  allow  you  to  specify the server to connect to; see \fIX(1)\fP.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
.TP 8
.B DISPLAY
To get default display.
.SH FILES
.PP
.TP 8
.B XWDFile.h
X Window Dump File format definition file.
.SH BUGS
.PP
Does not attempt to do color translation when the destination screen
does not have a colormap exactly matching that of the original window.
.SH SEE ALSO
xwd(1), xpr(1), xdpr(1), X(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1988, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.br
See \fIX(1)\fP for a full statement of rights and permissions.
.SH AUTHOR
Tony Della Fera, Digital Equipment Corp., MIT Project Athena
.br
William F. Wyatt, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory


