.\"ident	"@(#)r4xlock:xlock.man	1.1"
.\" @(#)xlock.n 22.2 89/09/20; Copyright (c) 1989 - Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.TH XLOCK 1 "20 Sep 1989" "X11R4"
.SH NAME
xlock \- Locks the local X display till a password is entered.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xlock
[
.BI \-display " dsp"
]
[
.BI \-mode " mode"
]
[
.BI \-time " timeout"
]
[
.BI \-count " n"
]
[
.BI \-font " fontname"
]
[
.BI \-nice " nicelevel"
]
[
.B \-mono
]
[
.B \-saver
]
[
.B \-root
]
[
.B \-v
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xlock
locks the X server till the user enters their password at the keyboard.
While
.B xlock
is running,
all new server connections are refused.
The screen saver is disabled.
The mouse cursor is turned off.
The screen is blanked and a changing pattern is put on the screen.
The pattern changes after
.I timeout
seconds. 
If a key or a mouse button is pressed then the user is prompted for the
password of the user who started
.B xlock.

If the correct password is typed, then the screen is unlocked and the X
server is restored.  When typing the password, characters are echoed
to the screen as question marks (?), and Control-U and Control-H are
active as kill and erase respectively.  To return to the locked screen,
click in the small icon version of the changing pattern.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-display " dsp"
The
.I display
option sets the X11 display to lock.
.B xlock
will not allow one to lock another server's displays thus only
.BI unix:server.screen,
.BI localhost:server.screen,
and
.BI :server.screen
are allowed for
.I dsp.
Where
.I server
is which X11 server socket to connect to and
.I screen
is which head to display the pattern on.
.TP 5
.B \-mode " modename"
As of this writing there are three display modes supported.
.TP 8
.B hop
Hop mode shows the "real plane fractals" from the September 1986 issue of
Scientific American.
.TP 8
.B life
Life mode shows Conway's game of life.
.TP 8
.B qix
Qix mode shows the spinning lines similar to the old video game
by the same name.
.TP 5
.B \-time " timeout"
The
.I time
option sets the number of seconds that each unique fractal will remain on
the screen before being replaced by the next one to
.I timeout.
.TP 5
.B \-count " n"
The
.I count
option sets the speed at which a mode will operate.  The different modes
interpret this value differently.  For 'hop' and 'qix' this sets the
number of pixels and lines respectively to draw in each color.
These patterns are calculated in batches of
.I n
objects, then sent to the server in a single color.  Faster machines,
expecially machines with floating point hardware can set this to a
higher number and still have fast changing patterns.
The 'life' mode, in contrast interprets this number as the number of
milliseconds to delay after each generation of the "critters".  A low
number here makes the pattern change rapidly, where 1000 means wait a
second between generations.
.TP 5
.B \-font " fontname"
The
.I font
option sets the font to be used on the prompt screen.
.TP 5
.B \-nice " nicelevel"
The
.I nice
option sets system nicelevel of the xlock process to
.I nicelevel .
.TP 5
.B \-mono
The
.I mono
option causes xlock to display monochrome, (black and white) pixels rather
than the default colored ones on color displays.
.TP 5
.B \-saver
The
.I saver
option causes xlock to only draw the patterns and not lock the display.
A keypress or a mouse click will terminate the screen saver.
.TP 5
.B \-root
The
.I root
option allows the root password to unlock the server as well as the user
who started xlock.
.TP 5
.B \-v
Verbose mode, tells what options it is going to use.

.SH BUGS
"kill -KILL
.B xlock
" causes server to be unusable, since
.B xlock
has removed all hosts (including localhost) from the access control list
to lock out all new X clients, and SIGKILL cannot be caught by any program,
.B xlock
will terminate before restoring the access control list.  This will
leave the X server in a state where
\fI "you can no longer connect to that server, and this operation cannot be
reversed short of resetting the server."\fP
		-From the X11R2 Xlib Documentation page 140. 
.SH SEE ALSO
X(1), Xlib Documentation.

.SH AUTHOR
 Patrick J. Naughton	 (naughton@sun.com)
 Window Systems Group
 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
 Mountain View, CA  94043
 415/336-1080

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1988-89 by Patrick J. Naughton and Sun Microsystems, Inc.


.SH CONTRIBUTORS
  milliken@heron.bbn.com	karlton@wsl.dec.com
  dana@thumper.bellcore.com	vesper@3d.dec.com	flar@sun.com
