.\"ident	"@(#)xinfo:xinfo.man	1.1"

.\" xinfo.man (Troff source file)
.\"	Acc: 575578487 Mon Mar 28 13:54:47 1988
.\"	Mod: 575578487 Mon Mar 28 13:54:47 1988
.\"	Sta: 575578487 Mon Mar 28 13:54:47 1988
.\"	Owner: 2011
.\"	Group: 1985
.\"	Permissions: 666


.\"	START USER STAMP AREA


.\"	END USER STAMP AREA

.TH XINFO 1 "local" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xinfo \- print information about X window system

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B xinfo
[-v | -t] [-d] [-w] [-f | -fp pattern] [-c columns] [-fn fontname]
[-display host:display]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fIxinfo\fP
prints information about a display, window, or font.

.SH OPTIONS

.I xinfo
understands to following options:
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-v
Print verbose information.
This is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-t
Print terse information.
The default is verbose.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-d
\fIxinfo\fP
prints information about the display and screen structures.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-w
\fIxinfo\fP
prompts you to select a window and prints the attributes of
the selected window.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-f
\fIxinfo\fP
prints the entire list of available fonts.
By default these are printed 1 per line.
Multiple columns are obtained using the \fB-c\fP option.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fp \fIpattern\fP
\fIxinfo\fP
prints the list of all fonts matching the given pattern.
See \fIXListFonts\fP for details.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fn \fIfontname\fP
\fIxinfo\fP
prints information about the given font.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-c \fIcolumns\fP
This option specifies the number of columns
used to list font names (see \fB-f\fP and \fB-fp\fP options).
The default is 1 column.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-display \[\fIhost\fP]:\[\fIdisplay\fP]
Normally,
.I xinfo
gets the host and display number to use from the environment
variable ``DISPLAY''.  Either or both can be specified with this option.
.I host
specifies which machine to create the
.I xinfo
window on, and
.I display
specifies the display number.

.SH X DEFAULTS
.PP
.TP 8
.B Verbose
Print verbose information.
This is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Terse
Print terse information.
The default is verbose.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Columns
This specifies the number of columns
used to list font names (see \fB-f\fP and \fB-fp\fP options).
The default is 1 column.

.SH AUTHOR

Copyright (c) 1987, AT&T
.br
Ross Hilbert - AT&T
