.\"ident	"@(#)r5fontutil:clients/bdftosnf/showsnf.man	1.1"
.TH SHOWSNF 1 "Release 4" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
showsnf - print contents of an SNF file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B showsnf
[-s] [-v] [-g] [-m] [-M] [-l] [-L] [-p#] [-u#]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \fBshowsnf\fP utility displays the contents of font files in the Server
Natural Format produced by \fBbdftosnf\fP.  It is usually only to verify that
a font file hasn't been corrupted or to convert the individual glyphs into 
arrays of characters for proofreading or for conversion to some other format.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-s
This option indicates that byte swapping should occur. This is needed for 6386 XWIN format, which is also used by the 730X.
.TP 8
.B \-v
This option indicates that character bearings and sizes should be printed.
.TP 8
.B \-g
This option indicates that character glyph bitmaps should be printed.
.TP 8
.B \-m
This option indicates that the bit order of the font is MSBFirst (most 
significant bit first).
.TP 8
.B \-l
This option indicates that the bit order of the font is LSBFirst (least
significant bit first).
.TP 8
.B \-M
This option indicates that the byte order of the font is MSBFirst (most
significant byte first).
.TP 8
.B \-L
This option indicates that the byte order of the font is LSBFirst (least
significant byte first).
.TP 8
.B \-p\fI#\fP
This option specifies the glyph padding of the font (\fI#\fP is a number).
.TP 8
.B \-u\fI#\fP
This option specifies the scanline unit of the font (\fI#\fP is a number).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
X(1), Xserver(1), bdftosnf(1)
.SH BUGS
There is no way to just print out a single glyph.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1988, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.br
See \fIX(1)\fP for a full statement of rights and permissions.

