.\"ident	"@(#)r4xfed:xfed.man	1.1"
.TH XFED 1 "17 Mar 1988" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xfed \- font editor for X window systems bdf fontfiles

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xfed
[\fIoptions\fP] filename.bdf

.SH DESCRIPTION

.I xfed
lets you interactively edit existing bdf-fontfiles.
When started,
.I xfed,
opens up a window showing a magnified version of the characters in the font.
There are four buttons to interact with 
.I xfed
, two stepping buttons to advance to the previous/next character in the
font, a write-file button and an exit button.
.br
If you leave
.I xfed
without pressing the write-button, no changes will be written to the
fontfile; otherwise the original fontfile is saved
to a backup file (filename~) and the new output written onto the original
fontfile.

.I xfed
accepts the following command line arguments:

.PP
.TP 8
.I -fg colorname
as usual - default is black
.PP
.TP 8
.I -bg colorname
as usual - default is white
.PP
.TP 8
.I -bd colorname
as usual - default is black
 note, that this color is also used for the grid; 'xfed -bd red ...' looks nice.
.PP
.TP 8
.I -bw number
as usual - default is 1
.PP
.TP 8
.I -nogrid
do not draw a grid (not very useful)
.PP
.TP 8
.I -psize number
to change the pixel magnification factor (default 16)

.SH COMMANDS

When the cursor is in the edit region, each mouse button has
a different effect upon the square that the cursor is over.

The 
.I left mouse button
turns a pixel to black

The 
.I right mouse button
turns a pixel to white

The
.I middle mouse button
inverts a pixel, turning it white if it was
black, or black if it was white.
  
.SH FILE FORMAT

see X-Doc 'Character Bitmap Distribution Format 2.1'

.SH ENVIRONMENT
DISPLAY - the default host and display number.

.SH SEE ALSO
X(1), BITMAP(1).

.SH BUGS

This is a first version - a quick hack.

Many edit features missing !

Should be able to change font characteristics and character properties.

If you move the mouse too fast while holding a mouse button down,
some squares may be `missed'.  This is caused by limitations in how
frequently the X server can sample the mouse location.

There is no way to write to a file other than that specified on the
command line.

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 1988 by Siemens

Claus Gittinger
.br
Software Consultant
.br
Siemens Munich
.br
Dep. D-St-Sp-4
.br
Charles-de-Gaullestr. 2a
.br
8000 Munich/Neuperlach
.br
West Germany
.br

Email: ..!decvax!unido!sinix!claus
