.\"ident	"@(#)xdemo:xdemo.man	1.1"

.\" xdemo.man (Troff source file)
.\"	Acc: 575578485 Mon Mar 28 13:54:45 1988
.\"	Mod: 575578486 Mon Mar 28 13:54:46 1988
.\"	Sta: 575578486 Mon Mar 28 13:54:46 1988
.\"	Owner: 2011
.\"	Group: 1985
.\"	Permissions: 666


.\"	START USER STAMP AREA


.\"	END USER STAMP AREA

.TH XDEMO 1 "local" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xdemo \- demo programs for X window system

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B xdemo 
[ option(s) ] [ bounce | fonts | kaleidoscope | stringart | swirl | twist | wheel ]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fIxdemo\fP
is a demo program for X version 11.
It is invoked with one of the above demo names and one or more options.
The demo names can be abbreviated if desired.
Each demo displays a picture, pauses, and starts over again.
Clicking any button in the demo window will terminate the demo.

.SH OPTIONS

.I xdemo
understands to following options:
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bd \fIcolor\fP
Specify the border color.
The default border color is ``black''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bg \fIcolor\fP
Specify the background color.
The default background color is ``black''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bw \fIpixels\fP
Specify the width in pixels of the border.
The default value is 4 pixels.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-d \fIdelay\fP
Specify the delay in seconds between pictures.
The default delay is 2 seconds.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fg \fIcolor\fP
Specify the foreground color.
The default foreground color is ``white''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fn \fIfontname\fP
Specify the font.
The default font is ``8x13''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fp \fIfontpattern\fP
Specify the font pattern (passed to \fIXListFonts\fP) to use in the fonts demo.
The default font pattern is ``*''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fs \fIfontstring\fP
Specify the font string to use in the fonts demo.
The default font string is ``ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-geometry \fIgeometry\fP
The \fIxdemo\fP window is created in the specified location.
See \fIX(1)\fP for a full explanation.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-display \[\fIhost\fP]:\[\fIdisplay\fP]
Normally,
.I xdemo
gets the host and display number to use from the environment
variable ``DISPLAY''.  Either or both can be specified with this option.
.I host
specifies which machine to create the
.I xdemo
window on, and
.I display
specifies the display number.
.SH X DEFAULTS
.PP
.TP 8
.B Background
Set the background color.
The default background color is ``black''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Border
Set the border color.
The default border color is ``black''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BorderWidth
Set the border width of the window.
The default value is 4 pixels.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Delay
Set the delay in seconds between pictures.
The default delay is 2 seconds.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Font
Set the font.
The default font is ``8x13''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B FontPattern
Set the font pattern to use with the font demo.
The default font pattern is ``*''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B FontString
Set the font string to use with the font demo.
The default font string is ``ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXWZ''.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Foreground
Set the foreground color.
The default foreground color is ``white''.

.SH AUTHOR

Copyright (c) 1987, AT&T
.br
Ross Hilbert - AT&T
