.\"ident	"@(#)r4xplaces:xplaces.man	1.1"
.TH XPLACES X "1 Feb 1988" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xplaces - take snapshot of personal X window configuration and print
command lines for all X applications
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xplaces
[-display \fIdisplayname\fP] [-id \fIwindow-id\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I xplaces
prints on standard output the command lines used to startup 
the X applications presently running and their geometry.
The output, after a little editing, can be used
in an initialization file.
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is a configuration example:
.sp
.nf
DISPLAY=unix:0.0; export DISPLAY
xterm -sb -geometry 80x9+1+19 -title console -name console -C \\
	-display unix:0 -e /e/moraes/.x11startup.bw2  &
xclock -geometry 100x100+1048+0  &
rcmd neat.ai /ai/bin/X11/xterm -display gerrard.csri:0 \\
	-geometry 80x57+291+26 -ls  &
xterm -geometry 80x56+310+53 -e rlogin bay.csri  &
xterm -geometry 80x51+410+128 -title gerrard.csri  &
.fi
.sp
.I This 
will start up a console terminal window (which receives redirected
console output, preventing it from messing up the display), a clock
and three terminal windows, one of which is started up by the shell script
.I rcmd
which starts up a command on a remote machine, putting it in the background.
.I Rcmd 
is useful only if the application on the remote machine has no use for
standard output and error because they get redirected to /dev/null.
.PP
On the CSRI and ANT Suns, the recommended way of running
.I X11
is by ``x11''.
In that case, the console xterm is automatically started up by the
.I x11
script, so that command must be removed from the xplaces output, and
the remaining xterms (and other applications can be added to the
.I x11start
file.
.SH OPTIONS
.B xplaces
is Xlib based, and accepts only the following two arguments.
.TP 8
.BI \-display " displayname"
where displayname describes the display to use, and is in one
of the standard forms. See X(1) for more details. The default is
determined by the environment variable DISPLAY.
.TP 8
.BI \-id " window-id"
which asks for the command string to start a particular window.
Note that the window-id specified may be the window id of a parent
if the window really holding the command string property (WM_COMMAND)
and xplaces will find it correctly by recursive search through the
window hierarchy. the window-id may be specified either as a decimal
number, or as a hexadecimal number (prefixed by 0x) which makes it
possible to use the output of 
.B xlswins, 
or 
.B xwininfo
with this option.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR x11 (x),
.IR X (x),
.IR xprop (x),
.IR xlswins (x)
.br
The Inter Client Communication Conventions Manual.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B xplaces
will complain about top level windows without commands associated with
them, and print the name and class of such windows. It also complains
about various X errors that may occur, and will die with an error
message if used with incorrect arguments.
.SH BUGS
.I xplaces
can only print the command line for application well behaved Xt applications,
or applications that accept -geometry, and -iconic, and set WM_COMMAND and
WM_NORMAL_HINTS.
.br
It can get confused if you use ambiguous options (-g for geometry, etc)
.br
With some window managers, it cannot locate icons. Blame for this
lies solely with the window managers!
.SH AUTHOR
The first version was by Ken Yap (ken@cs.rochester.edu)
.br
This version was rewritten to deal with a much wider range of window manager
and application behaviour by Mark Moraes (moraes@csri.toronto.edu)
